Fewer people are hospitalized with Covid-19 in the United States now than at any other point in the pandemic, but hospitals and staff continue to feel the strain.

As of Friday, there are 16,138 people in the hospital with Covid-19 -- fewer than there have ever been since the US Department of Health and Human Services first started tracking in July 2020. Just 2% of hospital beds are currently in use for Covid-19 patients.
Previously, the lowest point was in late June 2021, just before Delta became the dominant variant in the country. Covid-19 hospitalizations reached a peak in January 2022 amid the Omicron surge, when more than 160,000 people were hospitalized with Covid-19 at one time.
While the strain on the US hospital system directly related to treating Covid-19 patients has been significantly reduced, experts say that many hospitals are still burdened by staffing shortages and other patients who are coming in sicker after postponing care during the height of the pandemic.
"I can't hear that (data on Covid-19 hospitalizations) without shouting 'hallelujah' because the stress and strain of the last two years has been so enormous," Nancy Foster, vice president for quality and patient safety policy at the American Hospital Association, told CNN. "But there are a number of things going on now that continue to make hospitals and their staff very busy."
She says hospitals expected an influx of patients who had delayed care, either by choice or because the hospital system couldn't accommodate them.
"But I think it is that combination of having more people needing care than we had anticipated and having more staffing issues than we had anticipated that is really the biggest challenge right now," she said.
The broader snapshot of hospital capacity offers a stark contrast to the CDC's "COVID-19 Community Levels" map, which tracks new hospital admissions and beds in use specifically for Covid-19 patients.
The CDC map is nearly all green, with 95% of US counties considered to have a "low" community level of Covid-19.
But HHS data shows that more than three-quarters of inpatient beds are currently in use in hospitals across the country, and there are nine states where more than 80% of all beds in the state are occupied.
Experts say it's important to monitor both broader hospital capacity and the burden specifically from Covid-19.
"From an endemic Covid monitoring perspective -- at least that's where we hope we're heading -- we need to be able to tell whether we're in a state that requires public health measures," Dr. Stephen Parodi, national infectious disease leader for Kaiser Permanente, told CNN.
But the pandemic has dramatically shifted the way hospitals operate. Pre-pandemic, there was typically seasonal variation in how many beds were filled, with more patients expected during flu season in the winter and a lighter volume over the summer.
"What's different now, since the pandemic, is essentially we're running full all the time," Parodi said. "That calculation of a plan -- when it comes to staffing those beds, having the workforce available, the doctors, nurses, the support services like laboratory and radiology -- it's changing our thinking about what we need to plan for an entire year as opposed to just one particular season."
Parodi and others expect the continued strain on capacity to persist at least through the end of the year.
Overall since August 2020, there have been about 4.6 million total hospital admissions for Covid-19 in the US, according to data from the CDC. More than a third of hospital admissions have been among seniors age 70 and older.
The Omicron coronavirus variant may be reaching around the world, but different places are seeing significantly different effects.

In the United States, Covid-19 case numbers have been falling since January. They may have hit a plateau as a subvariant of Omicron, BA.2, becomes the main cause of infections.
But in China, an area of the world that has had few spikes during the pandemic, there has been a dramatic increase in cases as BA.2 rips through the country.
The difference, experts say, is part policy and part population-level immunity. What's happening in China doesn't necessarily mean the US is in for another huge spike in cases.
"Public health is very much a local thing," said Andy Pekosz, a virologist at the Johns Hopkins School of Public Health.
With the first Covid-19 cases in 2020, he said, trends were similar around the globe because most people's bodies had no experience with the coronavirus, and there were no vaccines. They had no protection against it.
Since then, different countries have used different vaccines and have had different success with vaccination campaigns. There's also a different level of immunity among populations in different regions. All of that affects the trajectory of Covid-19 cases.
"You would probably expect to see more variation from country to country in terms of case numbers and surges and fatality rates from here on out," Pekosz said. "All of that means it's just difficult to make blanket statements about how things are going to go forward."
Lockdowns in the US are a thing of the past and will probably stay that way, public health experts say. Though the decline in case numbers seems to be leveling off in the US, it's rare to see someone wearing a face mask in many places.
By comparison, China has a zero-Covid policy. As cases have been on the rise in more than two dozen provinces, restrictions have gotten much tougher.
In Shanghai, a city of 26 million, people are confined to their homes, able to go out only for essential supplies. Regular tests are mandatory. Officials throughout China check color-based "health code" systems to monitor people's movements. Everyone has a smartphone app that shows their personal QR health code: green for healthy, yellow for close contacts and red for confirmed or suspected cases.
If someone tests positive for Covid-19 -- even if they don't have symptoms -- they must isolate in large temporary facilities set up in stadiums and convention centers. They can't leave until they test negative twice. Pets are even sent to other centers for monitoring. Public health officials cordon off the person's home and disinfected everything.
With the highly contagious Omicron variant, lockdowns can't totally stop the growth in cases, but the strategy has helped, experts say.
China's seven-day daily new case average is more than 14,000, according to Johns Hopkins University. By way of comparison, the country has about four times as many people as the US -- but as of Thursday, the US is averaging more than 30,000 new Covid-19 cases per day. This is one of the lowest daily case rates since mid-July.
"That's a stark contrast," said Abram Wagner, a research assistant professor of epidemiology at the University of Michigan. "We're in different trajectories, with the US case numbers going down and kind of plateauing at this point in time, so the direction is different. But I think seeing the smaller number of cases in China, I think the policies that China has in play with restrictions on some level have had an effect."
Whether strict lockdowns are too heavy-handed and infringe too much on personal liberties is a different conversation, he said. But China has kept cases much lower overall than in the US, even during a spike.
What's made things more difficult is exactly how easy it is to catch Covid with Omicron.
"Omicron has changed the equation in China," Wagner said. "It's just hard to maintain a dynamic zero-Covid policy that stamps it out completely."
"Omicron, to compare it to other variants before it, has really changed an awful lot of the playing field," Pekosz said. "Its transmissibility is just off the charts."
Omicron is three times as likely to spread as the Delta variant. None of the vaccines made to protect against the original strain works as well, especially in populations in China that haven't seen spikes over the past two years.
"Sort of their firewall has broken down with Omicron, and they have a massive amount of people who are susceptible to this virus," said Justin Lessler, an epidemiologist at the University of North Carolina's Gillings School of Global Public Health.
The US population has built up immunity that China does not have. China has seen relatively few cases over the course of the pandemic, but the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimates that 37 million Americans -- about 1 in 11 -- got Covid-19 in the past winter alone.
Covid-19 has become a chronic condition for tens of millions of people -- and an expensive one, as well. Long Covid -- a condition marked by lingering symptoms that can involve multiple bodily systems -- has cost a cumulative $386 billion in lost wages, savings and medical expenses in the US alone as of January, according to one estimate.

On Tuesday, the Biden administration announced that it was making long Covid a national priority. It unveiled a plan to accelerate efforts to prevent, treat and detect long Covid through a national interagency research action program.
In February, the National Institutes of Health announced a $1.15 billion initiative to support research into the condition over four years.
Much research is needed to find answers to all the questions about long Covid.
There's no cure or specific treatment; there's not even a test for it. Scientists still don't fully understand what the symptoms are, how long it lasts, or why some people get it and others don't. They haven't even settled on a name for it: long Covid, post-Covid, long haul, post-acute Covid or chronic Covid.
The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention defines long Covid as health problems that last four or more weeks after a Covid-19 infection. The World Health Organization definition adds that the symptoms should not be able to be explained by an alternative diagnosis.
It's unclear exactly how many people have long Covid. Estimates range from 5% to 80% of those who become infected with the coronavirus. The condition can affect people of all ages, genders, races and ethnicities.
Some can develop long Covid after a mild infection or even after an infection with no symptoms at all. They may have symptoms for a short amount of time or for years.
Scientists don't fully agree what symptoms count as long Covid.
The CDC's list of physical symptoms includes difficulty breathing, fatigue, problems sleeping, cough, chest and stomach pain, headache, racing heart and other heart problems, high blood pressure, joint and muscle pain, a feeling of having pins and needles under the skin, fever, dizziness, rash, diarrhea, a changed menstrual cycle, type 2 diabetes, hair loss, rashes, blurry or double vision, and a continued loss of the sense of smell or taste.
Long Covid can also cause problems with mental health.
People report unexplained mood changes, brain fog or difficulty thinking, memory problems, difficulties with language and general cognition, and PTSD. Dozens of studies have also shown that long Covid patients report long-term depression and anxiety that they didn't have before becoming infected. Others report psychosis and suicidal behavior. Some research has found that people with long Covid have opioid use disorder and problems with other drug use.
Some studies suggest that the virus is associated with physical changes in the brain, and that may be what is causing some of these problems.
Symptoms can come and go over time, according to the World Health Organization. They may be so extreme that they're debilitating. As of July, the US government determined that long Covid could be considered a disability under the Americans with Disability Act.
It's not totally clear why long Covid develops. As the disease may affect any organ system, there could be multiple reasons.
In some people, it may stem from the direct cell damage caused by Covid-19. For others, long-term problems like muscle weakness or cognitive issues may develop after they're hospitalized for Covid-19 for an extended period of time. Symptoms may also linger because the immune system overreacts and fails to slow down after an infection clears.
Scientists are working on drugs that could treat long Covid and on tests to diagnose it.
Clinics to treat long Covid have popped up across the country, although the CDC says primary care physicians may also be able to help.
Patient advocates suggest that some doctors have dismissed patient concerns as psychological rather than physical in nature.
The CDC advises medical professionals to listen and validate a patient's experience if they have long-term symptoms. It encourages doctors to be particularly sensitive to people in marginalized populations that have been disproportionately affected by Covid, as their long-term symptoms may be underdiagnosed.
Doctors are also advised to partner with a patient to help them identify achievable goals in recovery. Patients may also be offered supportive care that can include physical or occupational therapy, mental health counseling, speech therapy or even breathing exercises.
While in treatment, people may be asked to keep diaries and calendars to document changes in their symptoms, especially if something seems to trigger them.
A study published in January says one thing that might help people with long Covid is to get vaccinated if they hadn't already. It found that people who got the vaccine were 54% less likely to report headaches, 64% less likely to report fatigue and 68% less likely to report muscle pain than were the unvaccinated.
The best way to avoid long Covid, doctors say, is to keep from catching Covid-19 in the first place. Some studies suggest that even with a breakthrough infection, the risk of long Covid is much lower for people who are fully vaccinated.
Pandemic hospitalization rates are at new lows, the vast majority of US counties have low community levels of the coronavirus, and as of March 25, all 50 states have lifted mask requirements.

But is there a cost to lifting restrictions and trying to return to a pre-pandemic normal?
In a new study, researchers predict that the lifting of masking and social-distancing restrictions in March 2022 could lead to resurgences of Covid-19 deaths in most states, based on projections from a simulation model.
The study also found that delaying lifting restrictions would not prevent surges in deaths for those states, concluding that there is no "magic moment" to lift restrictions.
The study, published Friday in the Journal of the American Medical Association Health Forum, projected deaths from Covid-19 in each of the 50 states, the District of Columbia and Puerto Rico between March 1 and December 31, 2022. The researchers simulated lifting restrictions at different times in the year and predicted the number of deaths that would follow using current estimates for infection and vaccination rates, while accounting for differences in risk between age groups.
"There is likely no amount of additional waiting time in any state after which removing [Covid-19 restrictions] will not lead to a rise in morbidity and mortality," the study says.
In almost every state, it says, lifting restrictions at any point in 2022 would lead to a rebound of peak Covid-19 deaths seen during the Omicron surge due to the high transmissibility of the circulating variant.
However, when researchers repeated the analysis using the transmissibility of the less-contagious Alpha and Delta variants, they did not see a similar surge in deaths.
"If we didn't have Omicron, we wouldn't have this problem," said Dr. Benjamin Linas, co-lead author of the study and a professor of medicine at the Boston University School of Medicine.
Delaying the lifts had a different effect on Covid-19 deaths depending on the state.
In California, Montana, North Carolina and Oregon, prolonging restrictions by just one month helped flatten the curve of deaths, though at no point could a surge in death rates be prevented. Nevertheless, delaying the lifting of restrictions could help relieve significant hospital burden in these states, the authors wrote.
The study found that prolonging Covid-19 restrictions caused higher peak incident deaths when the restrictions were to be removed in Massachusetts, New Jersey, New York and Ohio. Linas said that this is probably due to waning immunity in states with lower levels of natural immunity, which is the kind acquired after an infection.
Meanwhile, in Florida, Illinois, Michigan, Tennessee and Washington, the predicted peak of deaths stayed relatively similar despite modeling delays in lifting restrictions. In these states, prolonging restrictions would not change the disease burden in the community.
For those states, "the thing to change is that background of vaccination and immunity, and that's the way out," Linas said.
Deciding when to remove mandates thus requires a cost-benefit analysis, he said. On one hand, some states will have to weigh postponing a surge in deaths, and on the other hand is a return to normalcy.
"I would like policy-makers to take the study and try to lead the honest discussion we need now, which is to say, what is the goal of our mitigation policies?" Linas said.
The study uses a simulation model in which several assumptions had to be made, and it can't predict the transmissibility and severity of any future Covid-19 variants. The model also does not account for interstate travel and the role it may play in infection transmission.
Additionally, it is possible that people will continue to wear masks and socially distance even once state restrictions are lifted, potentially easing the peak of deaths.
